Beginning in 2014, individuals and small businesses are able to purchase private health insurance through competitive Marketplaces. Issuers must follow certain rules to participate in the markets, for example, in regard to the premiums they can charge enrollees and also not being allowed to refuse insurance to anyone or vary enrollee premiums based on their health. Enrollees in individual market health plans through the Marketplaces may be eligible to receive premium tax credits to make health insurance more affordable and financial assistance to cover cost sharing for health care services.

This article is the second in a series of three related articles in this issue of Medicare & Medicaid Research Review that describe the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS)-developed risk adjustment methodology for the individual and small group markets established by the Affordable Care Act (ACA) of 2010. The risk adjustment methodology consists of a risk adjustment model and a risk transfer formula. The risk adjustment model uses an individual’s demographics and diagnoses to determine a risk score, which is a relative measure of how costly that individual is anticipated to be. The risk transfer formula averages all individual risk scores in a risk adjustment covered plan, makes certain adjustments, and calculates the funds transferred between plans. Risk transfers are intended to offset the effects of risk selection on plan costs while preserving premium differences due to factors such as actuarial value differences. This article describes the risk adjustment model. See our companion article (Pope et al., 2014) for a description of the risk transfer formula. Another companion article (Kautter, Pope, and Keenan, 2014) discusses the key issues and choices in developing the ACA risk adjustment methodology.1

HHS will use this risk adjustment methodology when operating risk adjustment on behalf of a state. In 2014, the HHS methodology will be used in all states except one (Massachusetts), and it will apply to all non-grandfathered plans2 both inside and outside of the Marketplaces in the individual and small-group markets in each state.

The organization of this article is as follows. We first summarize the Hierarchical Condition Categories (HCC) diagnostic classification used for the risk adjustment model, which we designate the HHS-HCC diagnostic classification to distinguish it from the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) HCC, or CMS-HCC, classification used in Medicare risk adjustment (Pope et al., 2004). Then the data and methods, results, and evaluation for the risk adjustment model are presented. Finally, we provide examples of how the model output is used to calculate risk scores, which are an input into the risk transfer formula.

HHS-HCC Diagnostic Classification
The basis of the HHS-HCC risk adjustment model is using health plan enrollee diagnoses (and demographics) to predict medical expenditure risk. To obtain a clinically meaningful and statistically stable system, the tens of thousands of ICD-9-CM codes used to capture diagnoses must be grouped into a smaller number of organized categories that produce a diagnostic profile of each person. The diagnostic classification is key in determining the ability of a risk adjustment model to distinguish high from low cost individuals. The classification also determines the sensitivity of the model to intentional or unintentional variations in diagnostic coding, an important consideration in real-world risk adjustment.

The starting point for the HHS-HCCs was the Medicare CMS-HCCs. The CMS-HCCs had to be adapted into the HHS-HCCs for ACA risk adjustment for three main reasons:

Prediction Year—The CMS-HCC risk adjustment model uses base year diagnoses and demographic information to predict the next year’s spending. The HHS-HCC risk adjustment model uses current year diagnoses and demographics to predict the current year’s spending. Medical conditions may have different implications in terms of current year costs and future costs; selection of HCCs for the risk adjustment model should reflect those differences.

Population—The CMS-HCCs were developed using data from the aged (age ≥ 65) and disabled (age < 65) Medicare populations. For some conditions, such as pregnancy and neonatal complications, the sample size in the Medicare population is quite low, whereas sample sizes in the commercially insured population are larger. HCCs were re-examined to better reflect salient medical conditions and cost patterns for adult, child, and infant subpopulations in the commercial population.

Type of Spending—The CMS-HCCs are configured to predict non-drug medical spending. The HHS-HCCs predict the sum of medical and drug spending. Also, the CMS-HCCs predict Medicare provider payments while the HHS-HCCs predict commercial insurance payments.

Risk Adjustment Model HHS-HCCs
There are 264 HHS-HCCs in the full diagnostic classification, of which a subset is included in the HHS risk adjustment model. The criteria for including HCCs in the model are now described. These criteria were sometimes in conflict and tradeoffs had to be made among them in assessing whether to include specific HCCs in the HHS risk adjustment model.

Criterion 1—Represent clinically-significant, well-defined, and costly medical conditions that are likely to be diagnosed, coded, and treated if they are present.

Criterion 2—Are not especially subject to discretionary diagnostic coding or “diagnostic discovery” (enhanced rates of diagnosis through population screening not motivated by improved quality of care).

Criterion 3—Do not primarily represent poor quality or avoidable complications of medical care.

Criterion 4—Identify chronic, predictable, or other conditions that are subject to insurer risk selection, risk segmentation, or provider network selection, rather than random acute events that represent insurance risk.

Following an extensive review process, we selected 127 HHS-HCCs to be included in the HHS risk adjustment model (see Appendix Exhibit A1 for a listing of the 127 HHS-HCCs). Finally, to balance the competing goals of improving predictive power and limiting the influence of discretionary coding, a subset of HHS-HCCs in the risk adjustment model were grouped into larger aggregates, in other words “grouping” clusters of HCCs together as a single condition with a single coefficient that can only be counted once. After grouping, the number of HCC factors included in the model was effectively reduced from 127 to 100.